Welcome back to part three.
Perhaps some project where we're going to be conducting finger counting using a convex hull now that
we have the hands segment.
The next step is to actually count the fingers being held up.
We can do this by utilizing a convex hole and being a little clever with some math.
The contex hole draws a polygon by connecting points around the most external points in a particular
frame or a set of contours passed into that frame to give an example let's imagine we have an input
where we have a bunch of dots we could do is Kukla a convex hole by calculating the most external dots
and then drawing a polygon connecting them all.
In our case it's going to be the hand that is the input so we can have a set of points.
That's essentially just our threshold the image of the hand along some external contour information
and we'll draw a convex hole around that hand.
So now you notice that we have some points where theoretically each finger should be and depending on
whether those points are those fingers are extended those points are going to be closer or further away
from the center of the hand.
So the general shape of the polygon should look something like this.
So let's just extract the polygon itself.
And we have this sort of shape.
Notice that we first need to account for lines coming from the rest.
So we have to do some sort of calculation for the points towards the bottom.
Assuming that the hand is coming in straight up so what we can do in order to actually count the number
of fingers first going to calculate the most extreme points.
That is the most extreme top bottom left and right points then we can use their intersection to estimate
the center of the hand.
Next we'll calculate the distance for the point further away from the center and using that distance
we're going to calculate it against some sort of ratio like 90 percent of that distance to create a
circle.
So you notice a circle is centered at the center of the hand and it's 90 percent of the distance of
the furthest point away from the center.
So what that means is that any points that are outside of the circle and far away enough from the very
bottom of that region of interest those should be extended fingers because points are still calculated
by a convex hole.
If your fingers are closed but if you extend them then they will be outside of that orange circle.
And then we count them as actually extended fingers so that we can count them.
And that's how you perform your finger counting.
OK so let's now create a function that does all of this for us using Python.
OK so let's begin by actually defining a count.
Fingers function.
And this is going to take in the threshold that image as well as the hand segments which is the external
contour for just the hand that we calculated in the previous function.
Then the next step is to actually calculate the convex hole which is going to be assigned to the variable
Conn underscore hole and simply just call CB2 and it's the convex whole function.
And we're just going to pass an that Hans segment contour and then the next step is to grab those extreme
points the top bottom left and right and actually grab these points is a bit complicated because of
the way the convex whole object is formatted.
So I'm going to write down the code here and again mainly getting this code referencing the documentation.
So if you look up contour features in the open source computer vision documentation then eventually
you can scroll down here and there's even an idea of the convex hole and what the image should look
like as well as what the hand should look like.
And if you scroll down here it will begin talking about various inclosing so you can do an inclosing
circle including a rectangle or the polygon as discussed appear.
And that's really where we can actually grab the information for indexing the most extreme points.
So you can reference documentation if you have any questions over what the actual segment of code is
doing here.
But the way you grab those extreme points again it's going to be a bit complicated because the formatting
of the convex.
But first you need to do some indexing.
And right now we're going to grab the most extreme top point.
So you do some indexing here and you grab the men at this particular index and then grab the first item
off of it and that's going to be the actual index location for the x and y points.
So then you're going to pass that in to the convex whole and then offer this for our purposes.
We need this to be a tuple.
And this is going to be the top most point.
And what I'm going to do is I'm going to copy and paste for the notes for the bottom left and right
most points
and again this isn't really something I would expect students to be able to drive.
It's more something you'd reference the documentation or other online examples in order to grab those
most extreme points.
But this is the code for grabbing the most extreme top bottom left and right and then in theory the
center of the hand is going to be halfway between the top and bottom and halfway between the left and
right.
So it is a lot easier to understand for this one.
All we need to do is say our center x value is equal to left index 0 which is the x coordinate and then
the right point at index 0 which again is the x coordinate.
And we're going to divide that in half.
We're going to use two forward slashes because we want to make sure this is an integer and for the center
Y points it's going to essentially be the same thing will say top except in this case will index at
1 because we want the y coordinates because essentially these are all tuples of x and y coordinates
so top y plus the bottom why again divide by two here.
So now that we have our center X in our center why we're going to use if we come back up here.
Remember we imported pairwise that's going to be our distance calculation.
So I'll come back here and say that distance is equal to.
And we're going to Suckley the Euclidean distance between the center of the hand and the left right
top and bottom points and I can do this using this pairwise function.
Call Euclidean distances and then we pass that or x and y point to measure off of which is center X
center Y and the second parameter is going to be a list of all the points we want to calculate the distance
to which is left right top and bottom and then we're going to index and just grab the very first item
return off of this function.
So that's the actual Euclidean distance or it's the distances for the left right top and bottom from
the center.
So this basically returns back all those distances and we're just interested in the max distance.
The point that's further away so say that the max distance is equal to distance that max and then all
we're gonna do is create a circle with a 90 percent radius of the max in distance.
And this 90 percent that's a value can play around with depending on what the person's hand actually
looks like if they have very short fingers.
You may want to actually make that distance a little smaller because that means their fingers extended
don't protrude enough beyond their fingers curled in.
We're going to hear is say that the radius of our circle is 90 percent times the max distance and again
suffering a play around with me I make 80 percent.
It's up to you but I'll say 90 percent of the max distance in the way we're going to work this we want
to make this an integer so we'll cast that to an integer and then the circumference of that circle is
going to be equal to 2 times Pi which we can call pi times the radius of that circle.
And then when I go to do is I can create an R Y for that circle so I can see my circular are y is equal
to zeros and it's going to be in the same shape as the threshold that image just the x and y threshold
that image we're not concerned about the color channel.
And we're going to specify that state of type is a integer and then we're going to draw the circular
region of interest using CB2 circle.
We're going to call circular r.
I pasand those center points C-x and whip's center Y passen the radius
passen to 5:5 as recolor.
And then you get this the thickness A10 it's up to you actually won't really be viewing this circle.
And so it's going to be using it to calculate.
And then after this we're going to do is use bitwise and with the circle are y as a mask.
So say now our circular region of interest is equal to CB2.
And well past the threshold that image so threshold threshold it.
And the mask will be equal to the circular reasoning of interest and they're going to grab all the contours
in this circular region of interest.
So say image contours and also a hierarchy is equal to CB2 fine contours are going to create a copy
of that circular region of interest.
So Hirose copy and then we'll say CB2.
And in this particular case we're only concerned with the external contours and for the method here
we'll say chain approx.
And we'll actually just say none for this particular method.
And now it's time to actually count the number of points outside of the circle.
Essentially we'll start with a finger count of 0 saying no fingers are extended.
And I will say for every contour in that list of contours return we're going to grab the bounding box
of the contour so say is a little but a tuple in packing here.
To and you can call bounding rectangle for that contour and then we're going to check some conditions
here.
So the first condition is we want to make sure that the contour region is not at the very bottom of
the hand.
Basically if the person has a you know a lot of their arm inside the image we may get a lot of points
that are really just happen to do with the person's wrist or forearm.
We want to make sure you don't calculate those points.
And luckily we know the center of the hand.
So if it's too far below the center of the hand we'll just say don't worry about these points outside
a circle.
That's probably the person's wrist.
So the first condition will be basically you can call it sort of wrist position in or out of wrist essentially
just checking to make sure that this isn't a point coming from the wrist.
So the Kirkley that we're going to say center Y plus the center Y distance times let's say 25 percent.
And we're going to make sure that that is greater than the Y plus the height of this particular bounding
rectangle for that contour.
Essentially these contours.
It may pick up some of those bottom wrist contours and we want to make sure that it's not that.
So this is not actually a wrist.
And then the second shoe on make sure is that the number of points along the contour does not exceed
25 percent of the circumference of the circular region of interest.
Otherwise we're basically just counting points that are outside the hand itself.
So we may be actually grabbing some excellent contours completely off the hand and completely off the
actual circle because Or maybe a little bit of noise in the background so we may see some external contours
pop up.
We want to make sure that these aren't completely out of the limit so I will say some limit points and
well-defined those by the circumference of say circumference times again will go 25 percent and we'll
compare that to let's say greater than contour shape index 0.
And so we have two conditions.
So if it's outside of the wrist and if it's not one of those limit points there we're going to conclude
that it's a finger and we'll add one to our count.
Then once that loop is done we'll go ahead and return our count OK.
And that's the function.
Again lots of stuff going on here.
Hopefully understand the basic idea.
Essentially what we're doing is after casting the threshold that image as well as our hand segment contour
we create this convex whole Keckley the most extreme for points calculate the center calculate the distance
from the center to all those extreme points.
With the max distance create a circle off of that max distance and then using that circle.
We're going to end up putting contours around everything that's outside of a certain region of that
circle.
And then we're going to start counting with some limitations here making sure that it's not the wrist.
And also making sure that it's not some noise way outside of the circle.
And then we'll return or count the fingers.
OK that's it after this.
The next step is to just put it all together into a program that can then actually run and start counting
fingers.
We'll see you at the next lecture.